	IVOX Version 3.0 Help

INTRODUCTION

	IVOX, the Interactive VOice eXchange application, provides
	a telephone-like service via Internet Protocol (IP) based
	Local Area (LAN) and Wide Area (WAN) data networks.  By
	using voice compression algorithms, IVOX is able to
	maintain low data rate communications (less than 2400
	bits-per-second) with little impact on other computer data
	communication services.  IVOX can be used in conjunction
	with white-board, mission planning and/or video
	conferencing applications. IVOX supports point-to-point and
	IP-multicast (conferencing) voice communication.

WORKSTATION CONFIGURATION

	Versions of IVOX are currently available for Sun
	SPARCStation, Silicon Graphics, Hewlett Packard, and Linux
	workstations with built-in audio capability.  No additional
	hardware is required.  However, the voice compression
	algorithms used in IVOX can be sensitive to background noise
	so it is recommended that a good quality directional 
	microphone is used.  
	
	For workstations without built-in audio capability or to
	offset the load imposed on the CPU by the voice compression
	algorithms, IVOX allows for operation with an external
	hardware compressor.  Currently, IVOX works with hardware
	supported by Nova Engineering in Cincinnati, Ohio.

IVOX HARDWARE CONFIGURATION

The following configurations are planned for JWID 95:

  Workstation with built-in audio: 
	Connect the microphone into the microphone jack provided on
	the workstations motherboard or audio card.  External speakers
        or headphones offer superior sound quality over the speakers
        built in to most workstations.  Headphones also can prevent 
        audio "feedback" (echos) during full duplex conversation.

  External Hardware Vocoder: 
	    (Not yet implemented in Version 3.x of IVOX)
	Some workstation do not have built-in audio capability or the user 
	my wish to elimintate IVOX's load on the CPU to perform voice
        compression.  To support IVOX operationin these cases, IVOX
	will operate with an external vocoder (voice compression processor).
	The external vocoder interfaces to the workstation via an RS-232 
	serial port.  The external vocoder provides its own handset with
	Push-to-Talk button. Connect the vocoder hardware to the
	workstation serial port (Serial Port "B" is the default, see
	"Advanced Users Section" for "-s" command line option to 
	use a different port.), power it on and hit its hardware
	reset button before launching  IVOX.  When IVOX launches, it
	will "listen" to the serial port to detect if the vocoder is 
	operating correctly.  If IVOX does not detect the external 
	hardware vocoder, it will print a warning message and re-
	attempt to detect the external vocoder.

RUNNING IVOX

	IVOX is launched with the command "ivox". There are some
	command line options available when launching IVOX.  These
	are explained in the "Advanced User Section" below. IVOX
	uses the X-Window Motif library.  The shared libraries for
	Motif are provided as part of the Silicon Graphics, Hewlett
	Packard, and Solaris 2.4 operating systems.
	
	For security reasons, access to the workstation audio
	device is sometimes limited to the user logged into the
	console. As a result, special provisions may need to be
	made if it is necessary that IVOX be run from a remote
	terminal.
	
	SOLARIS 2.3 NOTE:  The LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable
	must include paths to the Motif libraries. Sometimes IVOX
	will display an error stating it can't load "libXm.so.3".
	If this version of the library is unavailable, create a
	link (or copy) of "libXm.so.2" and assign it the name
	"libXm.so.3".  IVOX should then launch correctly.

	SUNOS/LINUX NOTE:  Make sure that you have an XKeysymDB file 
        appropriate for Motif and have the XKEYSYMDB environment
        variable pointing at this file.

ADJUSTING AUDIO LEVELS

	The IVOX graphical user interface provides slider controls
	to control the audio microphone and speaker levels.
	
  Microphone: 
	The microphone level should be adjusted such that there are
	consistent peaks into the "yellow" region of the level
	meter.  To achieve best results with the low quality SUN
	Microphone (or similar mic), use the lowest microphone
	level setting and speak loudly if necessary. These
	omnidirectional microphone are sensitive and tend to pick
	up background noise which degrades the IVOX voice quality.
	
  Speaker: 
	The speaker volume can be adjusted as required. If using an
	external speaker system, the best quality is achieved with
	the IVOX speaker level set to a higher level and adjusting
	the external speaker system's volume level as appropriate.


PLACING A CALL

	IVOX supports unicast (point-to-point) and multicast
	(group) calls.

  Point-to-Point Calls

	To initiate a point-to-point call, type the host name or 
	dotted decimal IP address (e.g. itd.nrl.navy.mil or 128.60.2.2) 
	of the remote party in the form:

		name@address

	The "name" field is optional.  Then click on the "CALL" button
        to iniate the IVOX call. If your speaker is correctly connected 
	and you have typed in a valid host name (or address), at this point
	you should hear a ringing sound similar to when you place a
	normal telephone call.  A short beep will notify you when
	your call has been accepted.  A popup dialog will indicate call
        failure with a message indicating the reason for failure.  When 
	the call has been accepted, click the "PUSH-TO-TALK" button once 
	and begin speaking.  Disengage the "PUSH-TO-TALK" button by clicking 
	on it when your are finished speaking.

	IVOX allows multiple simultaneous point- to-point calls.  This is not 
	a very efficient form of conferencing but can work with limited size 
	conferences where IP multicast communication is not possible.  IP 
	multicast is the preferred method for conducting IVOX conferences.  
	A future version of IVOX may provide for operation with a conference 
	"hub" depending upon users' needs for conferencing in networks 
	without IP multicast support. 

	The IVOX "Session Display" provides a list of currently active and
        recent sessions.  Each session displayed has controls for enabling 
        and disabling transmit or receive operation for the session.  A 
	control/status indicator is provided for RSVP operation.  If the
        RSVP daemon process is running, the RSVP toggle can be depressed to
        attempt network bandwidth reservations for the call.  The button 
        blinks red while the reservation is pending and turns green when a 
        receiver has made a reservation.  After the indicator turns green,
        you may speak with guaranteed quality of service for voice packets
        transmitted.  You may speak without the reservation in place, but
        packets transmitted will have no service guarantees.

	Also, instead of re-typing the name and address information for a
        session/call already displayed, the user may select an exisiting session
        by clicking on it.  Then the user can initiate or end the call for 
        the selected session.  Calls can be terminated at any time by clicking 
	on the "END CALL" button.  The remote party will be informed that 
        the call has been ended.
		

  IP Multicast Calls

	IVOX supports the capability to conduct "conference" calls/
	sessions using IP multicast addresses. Any IP routers in the 
	network path to other IVOX users must support multicast 
	forwarding for this capability to work.  
	(Ask your network manager about this capability).
	
	To join a multicast conference session in progress, simply type
        the multicast address and port for the conference you wish to
        join in the "Remote Party" text field in the form:

		name@address:port/ttl

	The "name" and "ttl" fields are optional.  IVOX's default "ttl"
        is 32 network hops.  IVOX will very soon be compatible with the
        Session Directory tools ("sdr") for managing multicast sessions.
	After entering this information, press the "CALL" button to 
        join the session in progress.  A multicast "session window" will
        pop up displaying a list of other session members.

	To initiate a new conference (without using "sdr"), first pick a 
        multicast address and port.  Then type this information into the
        "Remote Party" text edit field as described above and press the
	"CALL" button to join the multicast group.  You may then "invite"
        other users to join the session using the "Invite" text edit field
        and button.  Type in the IP address for intended recipient of 
        the invitation and press the "INVITE" button.  The invitation is
        conducted using IP point-to-point addresses.  The remote user
        (if running IVOX) will be notified and may accept or decline
        the invitation to join the multicast session.

RECEIVING A CALL

	To receive calls, the IVOX application must be running. It
	is acceptable to iconify the IVOX application on the
	X-Windows desktop.  When a call request is received, IVOX
	will produce a "ring" tone and apop-up dialog box will be
        displayed.  The remote host name will be displayed and
	"ACCEPT CALL" and "REJECT CALL" buttons will be presented.
	Click the "ACCEPT CALL" button to answer the call.
	
	In IVOX's FULL-DUPLEX communication mode, your
	"PUSH-TO-TALK" button will be immediately enabled and you
	may click on it and begin speaking.  In the HALF-DUPLEX
	communication mode, the calling party is given the first
	turn to speak and you must wait until your "PUSH-TO-TALK"
	button is enabled to speak (If the calling party doesn't
	speak, your "PUSH-TO-TALK" button will automatically be
	enabled after a 15 second timeout). You may end a call at
	any time by clicking on the "END CALL" button.


EXITING IVOX

	Exit IVOX by clicking on the "QUIT" button in the lower right
	hand corner of IVOX's main window. You may also exit IVOX by 
	closing the IVOX window in the fashion your X11 window manager 
	requires (e.g. selecting "Quit" from the window's popup menu).

        PLEASE REMEMBER TO POWER OFF YOUR MICROPHONE TO CONSERVE
        ITS BATTERY!

TROUBLESHOOTING

"Services" warning during launch. 
	Make sure there is an entry for IVOX in the hosts
	"/etc/services" file.  Add the following:
	"ivox	2998/udp	IVOX Voice Terminal"

"Audio Device" error during launch. 
	Make sure your workstation supports audio input and output.
	(In HP case make sure the "Aserver" is running, see "man
	aserver" for more information). Make sure you are running
	from the console and/or have user privileges to use the
	audio device.  Some systems restrict this to the console.

No Speech Input (level meter not responding) 
	Make sure mic is on, its battery (if applicable) is OK, and
	the mic is plugged in the correct port.

No Sound Output. 
	Make sure speaker or headphones are
	properly plugged in and turned on.  The output volume
	usually needs to be set on a high setting when using most
	workstation's built-in speakers.

No response from remote party. 
	Make sure the remote party is running IVOX. Try to "ping"
	the remote host to make sure network connectivity is there.

Remote party not receiving voice. 
	Make sure the PTT button is engaged while you are talking.

Voice quality is broken up. 
	On lower end workstations (e.g. SUN SPARC II), make sure
	that the CPU is not overly busy.  Some of the voice compression 
        algorithms are CPU intensive. Without RSVP, highly loaded, 
	very low data rate connections may drop too many voice packets.  
	Networks supporting RSVP will reduce this problem.

Poor voice quality. 
	Make sure input levels are adjusted properly. Garbage in,
	garbage out.  Try to use the best microphone available. A
	directional microphone will minimize background noise and
	result in better speech quality.  The IVOX compression
	algorithms are sensitive to background noise and speech. 
	The lower the data rate algorithm selected, the lower the
	quality and greater the sensitivity to background noise.
	On Linux PCs, many sound cards only support 8-bit sound
        due to driver limitations.  IVOX will use 16-bit audio
        when possible.  8-bit sound is of limited quality.

Apparent lack of connectivity to some members in multicast.
	Double check the time-to-live (TTL) required to reach all
	members in your multicast group.  IVOX default TTL is 32.
	It may be set to a different value with the -t command line
	option.  A control will also be provided in the multicast
        session window to set the TTL.  Check with the network manager 
	to ensure that all gateways and routers between communicating 
	workstations support IP multicast forwarding and/or routing.


ADVANCED USERS SECTION

  Installing IVOX 
	IVOX consists of a single executable binary file.  It is
	recommended that the following entry be made in the host's
	"/etc/services" file:

    ivox           2998/udp          IVOX voice terminal

	IVOX will launch without this entry if port 2998 is
	available but it is recommended that the entry be made to
	reserve the port for IVOX operation.

  IVOX Command Line Options

	(NOTE: These command line options have not yet been 
	 incorporated into IVOX 3.x.  It will happen very soon, 
	 along with compatibility with Session Directory (sdr).)

	The following command line options are available when
	launching IVOX.  This enables scripts to be created to
	launch IVOX in a preset mode.  Also the "CONFIGURE"
	button's availability is controlled with a command line
	option so that the controls are normally "locked" from the
	typical user's access.

-a  remoteHost   : The remoteHost (hostname or dotted decimal IP 
		   address) is displayed in IVOX's user interface 
		   so that the user may press the CALL button 
		   immediately without explicitly typing the 
		   remote host address.  default = "hostname"

-v  vocoderType  : the default type is ALPC2400.  Others are:
                   ALPC1200, ALVC800, ALVC600, LPC2400
                   LVC1200, LVC800, and LVC600.

-f  numFrames    : number of vocoder frames per packet
                   (1-20) default = 8 (More frames per packet
                   lowers the raw data rate required by reducing
                   the ratio of network headers to user data)

-w  windowTime   : Window (buffering) time. (0-15 seconds)
                   default = 1 sec.  (Larger window times create
                   more end-to-end buffering delay but help to
                   overcome network connections with large jitter
                   in data delivery time)

-t  ttl          : Sets IP time-to-live for multicast
                   packets. (1-255) default = 32

-s  serialDevice : Allows the user to specify the serial device for
                   use with the external hardware vocoder.
                   default = "/dev/ttyb"

-h               : Sets IVOX to HALF-DUPLEX comm. mode. 
                   (default = FULL-DUPLEX)

-c               : Enables the "CONFIGURE" button (Allows
                   user to change IVOX settings).

CREDITS

	IVOX is based on software developed at the Naval Research
	Laboratory by Brian Adamson and Joe Macker for research
	projects sponsored by the Office of Naval Research (ONR).
	
	At one point, IVOX was also supported by:

		Newlink Global Engineering Corporation 
		6186 Old Franconia Road
		Alexandria, VA 22310 
		(703) 971-3303
		<adamson@newlink2000.com>

	Versions for additional operating systems (Win32, MacOS, etc) are 
        in development.

	The development of the external hardware vocoder was supported by
	the Naval Research Laboratory and is supplied by:

		Nova Engineering, Inc.
		5 Circle Freeway Drive
		Cincinnati, OH 45246-1105
		(513) 860-3456      
